UNITED NATIONS — President Trump’s bellicose speech to the United Nations on Tuesday drew a series of good-versus-evil lines that forecast confrontations to come as he vowed to “totally destroy North Korea” if it threatened the United States and denounced the nuclear agreement with Iran as “an embarrassment” that he may abandon.

From the dais of an organization meant to bring the nations of the world together, the president defended his America First policy and argued that nationalism can be reconciled with common causes. He repeatedly used the word “sovereignty” to describe his approach in a setting where the term traditionally has been brandished by nations like Russia and China to deflect criticism of their actions.

But it was his sharp-edged condemnations of international outliers like North Korea, Iran and Venezuela that drew the most attention in the room as he framed the conflicts over their actions as a test of the international system. With typical Trumpian flourishes like vowing to crush “loser terrorists” and labeling North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, “Rocket Man,” Mr. Trump at times dispensed with the restrained rhetoric many American presidents use at the United Nations.

“If the righteous many do not confront the wicked few, then evil will triumph,” he said as the audience of presidents, prime ministers, monarchs and diplomats remained largely stone-faced. “When decent people and nations become bystanders to history, the forces of destruction only gather power and strength.”

Mr. Trump singled out North Korea for his harshest words, broadening his indictment of the Pyongyang government beyond just its pursuit of nuclear weapons to its treatment of its own people and captured foreigners like the American college student who died shortly after being released and sent back to the United States.

Continue reading the main story
RELATED COVERAGE


North Korea Launches Another Missile, Escalating Crisis SEPT. 14, 2017

Mattis Leaves the Door Open to Military Options in North Korea SEPT. 18, 2017

Trump Signals He Will Choose Approach on Iran That Preserves Nuclear Deal SEPT. 14, 2017

NEWS ANALYSIS
Trump at U.N. Talks Up, but Does Not Press, Mideast Peace SEPT. 18, 2017
“No nation on Earth has an interest in seeing this band of criminals arm itself with nuclear weapons and missiles,” Mr. Trump said. “The United States has great strength and patience, but if it is forced to defend itself or its allies, we will have no choice but to totally destroy North Korea. Rocket Man is on a suicide mission for himself and for his regime.”

Without mentioning it by name, Mr. Trump also chastised China for continuing to deal with its rogue neighbor. “It is an outrage that some nations would not only trade with such a regime, but would arm, supply and financially support a country that imperils the world with nuclear conflict,” the president said.

He went on to assail the Iran agreement, which was negotiated by President Barack Obama and leaders of five other powers and ratified by the United Nations Security Council to curb Tehran’s nuclear program for a decade in exchange for lifting international sanctions. Under American law, Mr. Trump has until Oct. 15 to certify whether Iran is complying with the agreement, which he has done twice so far since taking office. But he has made clear that he would prefer not to do so again, which could result in the unraveling of the accord.

“The Iran deal was one of the worst and most one-sided transactions the United States has ever entered into,” Mr. Trump told the United Nations audience. “Frankly, that deal is an embarrassment to the United States, and I don’t think you’ve heard the last of it, believe me.”

The tough words cheered the delegation from Israel, whose prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, and advisers applauded. “In over 30 years in my experience with the U.N., I never heard a bolder or more courageous speech,” Mr. Netanyahu said afterward. “President Trump spoke the truth about the great dangers facing our world and issued a powerful call to confront them in order to ensure the future of humanity.”

Others called his speech over-the-top and counterproductive.

“If Trump was determined to demonstrate to the world that he is unhinged and an imminent danger to world peace, he has succeeded with this speech, and will only make it harder for him to win over the world to his self-destructive goals,” said Trita Parsi, president of the National Iranian American Council, a Washington-based group that is critical of the Tehran government but advocates more engagement.

Neither Hassan Rouhani, Iran’s president, nor Mohammad Javad Zarif, its foreign minister, were in the hall for Mr. Trump’s speech. North Korea’s ambassador left his seat before the president started speaking. The rest of the audience gave Mr. Trump polite but unenthusiastic applause.

Mr. Trump made no mention of climate change, Middle East peace or other issues that typically occupy American attention at the United Nations. It fell to Secretary General António Guterres to lay out the more traditional United Nations view of the world as he opened the annual United Nations General Assembly session.

“Trust within and among countries is being driven down by those who demonize and divide,” he said in a speech that included English, French and Spanish.

Morning Briefing
Get what you need to know to start your day in the United States, Canada and the Americas, delivered to your inbox.

Sign Up
SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
Citing hurricanes that recently ravaged Texas, Florida and the Caribbean, Mr. Guterres called on the world to live up to its promises in the Paris climate change accord, an agreement Mr. Trump has announced he will pull the United States out of. “We know enough today to act,” he said. “The science is unassailable.”

Mr. Guterres criticized what he called “closed doors and open hostility” in the face of vast refugee crises and called on countries to treat those crossing borders with “simple decency and human compassion.”

Mr. Trump arrived at the United Nations with a more overtly nationalist approach than past American presidents, predicated on a belief that the United States has been taken advantage of in areas like trade, security and other international affairs. In addition to abandoning the Paris accord, he has renounced the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact with 11 other nations and threatened to scrap the North American Free Trade Agreement if it is not renegotiated to his liking.

In his speech, he used the word “sovereign” or “sovereignty” 21 times. “As president of the United States, I will always put America first, just like you, as the leaders of your countries, will always and should always put your countries first,” he said, generating a smattering of applause.

“The United States will forever be a great friend to the world, and especially to its allies,” he went on. “But we can no longer be taken advantage of or enter into a one-sided deal where the United States gets nothing in return. As long as I hold this office, I will defend America’s interest above all else. But in fulfilling our obligations to our own nations, we also realize that it’s in everyone’s interest to seek a future where all nations can be sovereign, prosperous and secure.”

Mr. Trump mentioned only in passing one of the most prominent examples of a violation of sovereignty in recent years, the still-unresolved Russian intervention in Ukraine and annexation of Crimea. But he went on to denounce the actions of Venezuela’s government against its own people without explaining how that fit into his concept of respecting sovereignty.

“The Socialist dictatorship of Nicolás Maduro has inflicted terrible pain and suffering on the good people of that country,” Mr. Trump said. “This corrupt regime destroyed a prosperous nation by imposing a failed ideology that has produced poverty and misery everywhere it has been tried.”

The focus on sovereignty drew mixed reviews. “The speech was more positive than what was anticipated,” said President Sauli Niinistö of Finland. “There were a few tough comments, especially on North Korea. He stressed the sovereignty of nations. In my view, he meant that every country and leader should take responsibility for their people’s well-being.”

Aaron David Miller, a former American peace negotiator now at the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, said Mr. Trump “awkwardly tried to reconcile” his nationalist approach with the international orientation of the United Nations. “President Trump’s speech was a confusing hodgepodge of tropes, themes and threats that made one unmistakable point: there is no coherent Trump Doctrine,” he said.

After the speech, the president planned to have lunch with Mr. Guterres and later meet with Miroslav Lajcak, the Slovak official serving as president of the General Assembly. He also scheduled a meeting with Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, the emir of Qatar, a Persian Gulf state Mr. Trump has accused of being a “funder of terrorism.”

Mr. Trump has tried to mediate a standoff between Qatar and other Arab countries. Qatar has sought to convince Mr. Trump that he is wrong about its links to radicalism, airing television ads during the United Nations session with an intended audience of one featuring captions like, “Qatar Stands With United States Against Terrorism.”

On Tuesday evening, Mr. Trump will host a diplomatic reception. He will also spend Wednesday and Thursday at the United Nations, meeting separately with the leaders of Britain, Jordan, Egypt, the Palestinian Authority, Turkey, Afghanistan and Ukraine. He will host a luncheon with African leaders and another with the leaders of South Korea and Japan to seek a common strategy to deal with North Korea.